Clarify metric SDK views section (#3524)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/sdk.md

  application developer does not need any attributes (e.g. just get the total
  count of all incoming requests).

> The SDK MUST provide functionality for a user to create Views for a

Reviewer: The word "register" changed to "create". Did you intend this change?

Author: It was. The existing specification said that there were inputs to a registration mechanism. The registration is of a view with a `MeterProvider`, it would be the input for a registration. The inputs listed, however, were for the construction of a view.

I think I see you point though. I will update with a revision that still states the SDK provides a way to register a view with a `MeterProvider`, but will make the distinction on the inputs being for the construction of a view. Does that make sense?

Author: Updated: 93845616e6be5feabcae46168560bcd274a5623a

PTAL

_all_ the provided criteria for the View to be applied. For example, if the
criteria are _instrument name == "Foobar"_ and _instrument type is Histogram_,
it will be treated as _(instrument name == "Foobar") AND (instrument type is
Histogram)_.

The SDK MUST accept a `name` as a criterion. This `name` is evaluated to match
an Instrument in the following manner.

1. If the value of `name` is `*`, the criterion matches all Instruments.
2. If the value of `name` is exactly the same as an Instrument, then the
   criterion matches that instrument.

Additionally, the SDK MAY support wildcard pattern matching for the `name`
criterion using the following characters.

* A question mark (`?`): matches any single character
* An asterisk (`*`): matches any number of any characters including none

If wildcard pattern matching is supported, the `name` criterion will match if
the wildcard pattern is evaluated to match the Instrument name.

If the SDK does not support wildcards in general, it MUST still recognize the
special single asterisk (`*`) character as matching all Instruments.

The SDK MAY also accept the following criteria:

> * `type`: If the value of `type` is the same as an Instrument's type, then the

Reviewer: My read of the current spec is that the SDK is required to accept these, but must not obligate the user to provide them. This goes back to changes you've recently made to help clear up ambiguous language around optional arguments.. looks like we have another culprit with views.

Author: @open-telemetry/specs-metrics-approvers @reyang thoughts?

Reviewer: I think implementations should strive to support all the options described here. Maybe they don't support `aggregation_cardinality_limit` initially, but we want to emphasize across consistency across the implementations. Maybe we should say the SDK SHOULD accept these but not obligate the user to provide them.

Reviewer 2: +1 to splitting the description of the requirements to explicitly state that the SDK MUST (for required options) or SHOULD (for optional/recommended options) provide a mechanism for the user to provide optional arguments, MUST NOT require that they be provided by the user, and MUST have a documented default behavior if the user does not provide input.

Author: Updated to require the SDK to accept these criteria and made it clear it is optional for the user to provide them.

Also done for the stream configuration.

PTAL

  parameter, attributes whose keys are not in the list will be ignored. If the
  user does not provide any values, all of the attributes will be used (TODO:
  once the Hint API is available, the default behavior should respect the Hint
  if it is available).
* `aggregation`: The name of an aggregation function to be used. If the user
  does not provide a value, the `MeterProvider` MUST apply a [default
  aggregation](#default-aggregation) configurable on the basis of instrument
  type according to the [MetricReader](#metricreader) instance.
* **Status**: [Feature-freeze](../document-status.md) - `exemplar_reservoir`: A
  functional type that generates an exemplar reservoir a `MeterProvider` will
  use when storing exemplars. This functional type needs to be a factory or
  callback similar to aggregation selection functionality which allows
  different reservoirs to be chosen by the aggregation.
* **Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md) -
  `aggregation_cardinality_limit`: A positive integer value defining the
  maximum number of data points allowed to be emitted in a collection cycle by
  a single instrument. See [cardinality limits](#cardinality-limits), below.

> #### View name

Reviewer: Seems like this should roll into the stream configuration section.

Author: In the example python code from this view section the view name is separate from the stream configuration. Go doesn't have view names so I'm not sure how other languages implement view names, but it seems like it would be its own input parameter and therefore warrant being its own section, right?

Author: I think you might be correct, they are just going to be the name of the metric in the resulting stream. If that is indeed the case, I would be in favor of just calling them the stream name in the "Stream configuration" section.

@reyang @jmacd thoughts?

Reviewer 3: I support the idea that view name == stream name.

Author: I moved this into the `name` parameter of the stream configuration. PTAL.

  application developer does not need any attributes (e.g. just get the total
  count of all incoming requests).

The SDK MUST provide functionality for a user to create Views for a
`MeterProvider`. This functionality MUST accept as inputs the [Instrument
selection criteria](#instrument-selection-criteria) and the resulting [stream
configuration](#stream-configuration), and it MAY also accept as an input the
[View name](#view-name).

> If no Instrument selection criteria is provided by the user, the SDK SHOULD

Reviewer 4: Not sure, but maybe:
```suggestion
If no Instrument selection criteria are provided by the user, the SDK SHOULD
```
or 
```suggestion
If no Instrument selection criterion is provided by the user, the SDK SHOULD
```
?

> treat it as an error. It is RECOMMENDED that the SDK fail fast. Refer to [Error

Author: The original contains `fail` and it is grammatically correct. I'm not sure we need to change this.

> treat it as an error. It is RECOMMENDED that the SDK fail fast. Refer to [Error

Reviewer 5: Originally the noun was plural (SDK implementations).

handling in OpenTelemetry](../error-handling.md) for the general guidance.

> The SDK MUST provide the means to register Views with a `MeterProvider`.

Author: I'm not opposed to that, but I would suggest it be done in a follow on PR. I would like to keep the changes to this section within this section as it is supposed to be editorial only and moving topics to other sections might be more confusing than it needs to be.

#### Instrument selection criteria

> Instrument selection criteria are the predicate that determine if a View will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An instrument selection criterion is a predicate that determines if a View will
```
or 
```suggestion
Instrument selection criteria are the predicates that determine if a View will
```
As above, not sure about this. English is not my primary language, so feel free to dismiss this suggestion if this doesn't make any sense.

be applied to an Instrument or not.

Criteria SHOULD be treated as additive. This means an Instrument has to match
_all_ the provided criteria for the View to be applied. For example, if the
criteria are _instrument name == "Foobar"_ and _instrument type is Histogram_,
it will be treated as _(instrument name == "Foobar") AND (instrument type is
Histogram)_.

The SDK MUST accept a `name` as a criterion. This `name` is evaluated to match
an Instrument in the following manner.

1. If the value of `name` is `*`, the criterion matches all Instruments.
2. If the value of `name` is exactly the same as an Instrument, then the

>    criterion matches that instrument.

Author: An ordered list is used here as the first entry has precedence over the latter. This is communicated better with an ordered list.

* A question mark (`?`): matches any single character
* An asterisk (`*`): matches any number of any characters including none

If wildcard pattern matching is supported, the `name` criterion will match if
the wildcard pattern is evaluated to match the Instrument name.

If the SDK does not support wildcards in general, it MUST still recognize the
special single asterisk (`*`) character as matching all Instruments.

The SDK MAY also accept the following criteria:

* `type`: If the value of `type` is the same as an Instrument's type, then the
  criterion matches that Instrument.
* `unit`: If the value of `unit` is the same as an Instrument's unit, then the
  criterion matches that Instrument.
* `meter_name`: If the value of `meter_name` is the same as the Meter that
  created an Instrument, then the criterion matches that Instrument.
* `meter_version`: If the value of `meter_version` is the same version as the
  Meter that created an Instrument, then the criterion matches that Instrument.
* `meter_schema_url`: If the value of `meter_schema_url` is the same schema URL
  as the Meter that created an Instrument, then the criterion matches that
  Instrument.

> The SDK MAY accept additional criteria. For example, a strong typed language

Reviewer 6: Nit: `a strongly typed language`

Author: ```suggestion
The SDK MAY accept additional criteria. For example, a strongly typed language
```

may support point type criterion (e.g. allow the users to select Instruments
based on whether the underlying number is integral or rational).

#### Stream configuration

> Stream configuration are the parameters that defines the [metric

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Stream configuration are the parameters that define the [metric
```

> Stream configuration are the parameters that define the [metric

Reviewer 6: Why is "name" not an optional part of this?

Author: Similar to what I said [bellow](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3524/files#r1213396868), I'm not sure the view name is equivalent to the stream name. If there is consensus that they are I can update.

Reviewer 3: Not sure what we'd do with another name, other than identify the stanza (i.e.,the pair of the selection criteria and stream behavior) in logs and other diagnostics. It would be little more than a comment, and I'm not sure it needs to be specified.

Author: Update by moving the view name into a `name` parameter of the stream configuration. PTAL.

stream](./data-model.md#events--data-stream--timeseries) a `MeterProvider` will
use to define telemetry pipelines.

> The SDK MUST accept a `description` as a stream configuration parameter. The

Reviewer 6: Description is an optional parameter though.  Can you outline it MUST accept description, but description does not need to be provided?

Reviewer 3: It sounds like we want a framework to specify two kinds of optionality, things an OTel SDK SHOULD support and what are the optional things a user MAY do with it.

> `description` value be used to define the metric stream description. If the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`description` value SHOULD be used to define the metric stream description. If the
```
?

user does not provide a `description` value, the description from the
Instrument a View matches MUST be used by default.

> The SDK MAY also accept the following stream configuration parameters:

Reviewer 6: I think the SDK MUST accept these as optional parameters.

There's a difference between an *optional parameter* and an *optional implementation detail* that I think is being confused here.

These three attributes are definitely not "MAY", these are key aspects that make `View` useful.  However, a user does not need to specify them all the time, but an SDK *MUST* implement the ability for them to be specified.

Author: I'll update to make this clarification.

Reviewer 3: We seem to be debating "MAY" and whether they ought to be "MUST" or "SHOULD". I support changing all view-related "MAY"s to "SHOULD"s, which is to say I believe this document should list all the common features of a View implementation and all of OTel's default SDKs ought to support the "SHOULD" features. Does that help us resolve this?

Author: Updated. PTAL.

  type according to the [MetricReader](#metricreader) instance.
* **Status**: [Feature-freeze](../document-status.md) - `exemplar_reservoir`: A
  functional type that generates an exemplar reservoir a `MeterProvider` will
  use when storing exemplars. This functional type needs to be a factory or
  callback similar to aggregation selection functionality which allows
  different reservoirs to be chosen by the aggregation.
* **Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md) -
  `aggregation_cardinality_limit`: A positive integer value defining the
  maximum number of data points allowed to be emitted in a collection cycle by
  a single instrument. See [cardinality limits](#cardinality-limits), below.

#### View name

Views can be given a name.

If an SDK allows for Views to be named, and a user does not provide one, then
the Instrument name the View matches MUST be used as a default name.

In order to avoid conflicts, Views that have a name SHOULD have an instrument
selector that selects at most one instrument. If the Instrument selection
criteria for a View with a name can select more than one instrument (i.e.

> wildcards) the SDK MAY fail fast in accordance with initialization [error

Reviewer 4: This might lead to SDKs failing fast if the `*` is used, right?
According to [this conversation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3524/files#r1213352279), View names seem to be optional/not yet implemented in some languages. Given this is the case, would it maybe be better to specify to "emit a warning and ignore the misconfiguration with some fallback"? Or am I missing something that leads to View names being essential for the SDK to start up?
